README.md, before:

# HRassess v3.0.0

Performance assessment portal built with PHP and MySQL.

## Quick start

1. Copy `.env.example` to `.env` and adjust values as needed.
2. Create the database schema:
   ```sh
   mysql -u root -p < init.sql
   ```
3. (Optional) Load demo content:
   ```sh
   mysql -u root -p < dummy_data.sql
   ```
4. Seed a default administrator account:
   ```sh
   make seed-admin
   ```
   The command prints the generated password to the console.
5. (Optional) Rebuild the database from scratch, loading migrations, demo data, and an admin user:
   ```sh
   make rebuild
   ```
   Pass `ARGS="--no-dummy"` or `ARGS="--no-admin"` to the make target (or run `php scripts/rebuild_app.php` directly) if you want to exclude demo rows or the admin seeding step.
6. Launch the development web server:
   ```sh
   make run
   ```
7. Visit [http://localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080) and sign in with the seeded administrator credentials.

## Configuration

Environment variables are read directly via `getenv`. Set them in your shell or a `.env` file (loaded by your web server):

- `DB_HOST`, `DB_NAME`, `DB_USER`, `DB_PASS`
- `BASE_URL` (defaults to `/`)
- `APP_DEBUG` (`1` to show errors in development, otherwise disable display of errors)

### Single sign-on

Administrators can configure Google Workspace or Microsoft Entra ID (Azure AD) authentication under **Administration → Settings**.
Provide the client ID, client secret, and (for Microsoft) the tenant identifier. The OAuth redirect URL is
`<BASE_URL>/oauth.php?provider=<google|microsoft>&action=callback`; ensure this is registered with each provider.

When a user signs in with SSO and no account exists, the platform auto-provisions a pending profile that is limited to the
Profile page until a supervisor approves it. Supervisors (and admins) can review and approve accounts at
**Team & Reviews → Pending Approvals**. A banner on the profile and login pages explains the pending status to the end user.
Supervisors can also set the user's next assessment date during approval.

### Email delivery

Enable SMTP notifications from **Administration → Settings**. The system sends approval and assessment scheduling emails using the
connection details provided. Required fields are the host, port, authentication credentials (if needed), and the "From" address.
Test the configuration by approving a pending account or scheduling an assessment for a staff member.

### API documentation

A built-in Swagger UI is available to administrators at `/swagger.php` (linked under **Administration → API Documentation**).
The page renders the OpenAPI definition stored at `docs/openapi.json`, covering FHIR resources and internal helper endpoints.

## Internationalisation

Translations live in `lang/*.json`. Users can switch between English, French, and Amharic via the language selector. Preferences
persist in the session and a cookie. To add a language:

1. Create `lang/<code>.json` with translation keys.
2. Add the language code to `AVAILABLE_LOCALES` in `i18n.php`.

## Database migrations & data

- `init.sql` – bootstrap schema.
- `migration.sql` – incremental changes when upgrading existing databases.
- `dummy_data.sql` – optional demo users and responses. Remove with `dummy_data_cleanup.sql` if needed.

## Questionnaire import

Administrators can upload FHIR `Questionnaire` resources (JSON or XML) from
**Administration → Manage Questionnaires**. The importer accepts standalone
Questionnaire resources or Bundles that contain them. Items with
`<type>group</type>` (or child `item` nodes) become sections in the application,
and every nested item is imported as a question in the same order as the source
file. An Excel planning sheet that demonstrates the grouping structure is
available at `scripts/download_questionnaire_template.php`.
It ships with the full Warehouse &amp; Inventory Management (WIM)
technical assessment so new deployments have a ready-to-use
questionnaire aligned with EPSA requirements.

## Development tooling

- `make lint` – run `php -l` across all PHP files.
- GitHub Actions workflow `.github/workflows/ci.yml` lints PHP and checks MySQL availability.

## System upgrades

Use the [`scripts/system_upgrade.php`](scripts/system_upgrade.php) CLI to deploy
new releases safely. The tool backs up the application directory and database
before applying updates from GitHub and provides downgrade capabilities if an
upgrade fails. Refer to [`docs/system-upgrade.md`](docs/system-upgrade.md) for
usage examples and options.

## Quality and compliance

Refer to [`docs/quality_assurance.md`](docs/quality_assurance.md) for the
project's quality management and compliance framework. The checklist aligns the
delivery workflow with ISO/IEC 12207 (software life cycle), ISO/IEC 25010
(product quality), ISO/IEC 27001 (information security), and related standards.

## Default navigation

- `/index.php` – login
- `/my_performance.php` – personal performance hub (default landing page after login)
- `/submit_assessment.php` – assessment submission
- `/admin/*` – administration

## Progressive Web App assets

`manifest.webmanifest` and `service-worker.js` are referenced with the configured base URL to ensure they resolve when deployed
in a subdirectory.

Commit message:

chore(migrations): align branding defaults with upload changes

README.md, after:

# HRassess v3.0.0

Performance assessment portal built with PHP and MySQL.

## Quick start

1. Copy `.env.example` to `.env` and adjust values as needed.
2. Create the database schema:
   ```sh
   mysql -u root -p < init.sql
   ```
3. (Optional) Load demo content:
   ```sh
   mysql -u root -p < dummy_data.sql
   ```
4. Seed a default administrator account:
   ```sh
   make seed-admin
   ```
   The command prints the generated password to the console.
5. (Optional) Rebuild the database from scratch, loading migrations, demo data, and an admin user:
   ```sh
   make rebuild
   ```
   Pass `ARGS="--no-dummy"` or `ARGS="--no-admin"` to the make target (or run `php scripts/rebuild_app.php` directly) if you want to exclude demo rows or the admin seeding step.
6. Launch the development web server:
   ```sh
   make run
   ```
7. Visit [http://localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080) and sign in with the seeded administrator credentials.

## Configuration

Environment variables are read directly via `getenv`. Set them in your shell or a `.env` file (loaded by your web server):

- `DB_HOST`, `DB_NAME`, `DB_USER`, `DB_PASS`
- `BASE_URL` (defaults to `/`)
- `APP_DEBUG` (`1` to show errors in development, otherwise disable display of errors)

### Single sign-on

Administrators can configure Google Workspace or Microsoft Entra ID (Azure AD) authentication under **Administration → Settings**.
Provide the client ID, client secret, and (for Microsoft) the tenant identifier. The OAuth redirect URL is
`<BASE_URL>/oauth.php?provider=<google|microsoft>&action=callback`; ensure this is registered with each provider.

When a user signs in with SSO and no account exists, the platform auto-provisions a pending profile that is limited to the
Profile page until a supervisor approves it. Supervisors (and admins) can review and approve accounts at
**Team & Reviews → Pending Approvals**. A banner on the profile and login pages explains the pending status to the end user.
Supervisors can also set the user's next assessment date during approval.

### Email delivery

Enable SMTP notifications from **Administration → Settings**. The system sends approval and assessment scheduling emails using the
connection details provided. Required fields are the host, port, authentication credentials (if needed), and the "From" address.
Test the configuration by approving a pending account or scheduling an assessment for a staff member.

### Branding & Logo

Administrators can update the site identity from **Administration → Branding & Landing**. Logo uploads are stored under
`assets/uploads/branding` inside the project directory. Ensure this folder (and `assets/uploads/`) is writable by the web server
user. Supported formats include PNG, JPEG, GIF, SVG, and WebP. The application validates uploads using PHP's Fileinfo extension
and rejects unsupported MIME types.

Uploaded files are saved with randomized filenames and served via relative web paths so deployments under a subdirectory continue
to work. If no custom logo is configured, the default EPSA logo (`assets/img/epss-logo.svg`) renders automatically.

Run `bin/check-upload-env.php` to verify the upload environment. The script reports the resolved base path, upload directory
permissions, and relevant PHP configuration such as `upload_max_filesize`, `post_max_size`, and Fileinfo availability.

After upgrading from an earlier release, apply the database migrations to ensure the branding columns (`brand_color`, persisted logo path, and SMTP settings) exist:

```sh
mysql -u root -p < migration.sql
```

The script adds the missing columns, seeds defaults for the singleton configuration row, and normalises any existing logo path so the new upload handler continues working without manual edits.

### API documentation

A built-in Swagger UI is available to administrators at `/swagger.php` (linked under **Administration → API Documentation**).
The page renders the OpenAPI definition stored at `docs/openapi.json`, covering FHIR resources and internal helper endpoints.

## Internationalisation

Translations live in `lang/*.json`. Users can switch between English, French, and Amharic via the language selector. Preferences
persist in the session and a cookie. To add a language:

1. Create `lang/<code>.json` with translation keys.
2. Add the language code to `AVAILABLE_LOCALES` in `i18n.php`.

## Database migrations & data

- `init.sql` – bootstrap schema.
- `migration.sql` – incremental changes when upgrading existing databases.
- `dummy_data.sql` – optional demo users and responses. Remove with `dummy_data_cleanup.sql` if needed.

## Questionnaire import

Administrators can upload FHIR `Questionnaire` resources (JSON or XML) from
**Administration → Manage Questionnaires**. The importer accepts standalone
Questionnaire resources or Bundles that contain them. Items with
`<type>group</type>` (or child `item` nodes) become sections in the application,
and every nested item is imported as a question in the same order as the source
file. An Excel planning sheet that demonstrates the grouping structure is
available at `scripts/download_questionnaire_template.php`.
It ships with the full Warehouse &amp; Inventory Management (WIM)
technical assessment so new deployments have a ready-to-use
questionnaire aligned with EPSA requirements.

## Development tooling

- `make lint` – run `php -l` across all PHP files.
- GitHub Actions workflow `.github/workflows/ci.yml` lints PHP and checks MySQL availability.

## System upgrades

Use the [`scripts/system_upgrade.php`](scripts/system_upgrade.php) CLI to deploy
new releases safely. The tool backs up the application directory and database
before applying updates from GitHub and provides downgrade capabilities if an
upgrade fails. Refer to [`docs/system-upgrade.md`](docs/system-upgrade.md) for
usage examples and options.

## Quality and compliance

Refer to [`docs/quality_assurance.md`](docs/quality_assurance.md) for the
project's quality management and compliance framework. The checklist aligns the
delivery workflow with ISO/IEC 12207 (software life cycle), ISO/IEC 25010
(product quality), ISO/IEC 27001 (information security), and related standards.

## Default navigation

- `/index.php` – login
- `/my_performance.php` – personal performance hub (default landing page after login)
- `/submit_assessment.php` – assessment submission
- `/admin/*` – administration

## Progressive Web App assets

`manifest.webmanifest` and `service-worker.js` are referenced with the configured base URL to ensure they resolve when deployed
in a subdirectory.
